Spring boot authorization (#1484)
oktadeveloper/okta-blog: _source/_posts/2024-01-24-spring-boot-authorization.md

> - [Java OpenJDK 17](https://jdk.java.net/java-se-ri/17)
> - [Auth0 account](https://auth0.com/signup)
> - [Auth0 CLI 1.4.0](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli#installation)

{% include toc.md %}

## Authentication and Authorization on the Web

[Authentication](https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-authentication) is the process of proving a user's identity, proving they are who they claim to be. [Authorization](https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-authorization) is the process of giving someone the ability to access a resource.

In computer systems, authentication and authorization are part of a discipline called Identity and Access Management (IAM). [OAuth 2.0](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749.html) is a standard designed to authorize a website or application to access resources hosted by third-party services on behalf of a user. For web and mobile applications, an identity protocol was born in 2014, [OpenID Connect 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html) (OIDC), a simple identity layer on top of OAuth 2.0, now widely adopted as part of the IAM strategy of many identity providers and identity clients on the internet.

> For authorizing access to a protected resource, OAuth 2.0 uses Access Tokens, a piece of data, a string representing an authorization issued to the client, scopes and durations of the access, validated at the resource server. Briefly, the standard defines the roles of resource owner, resource server, client, and authorization server, and a protocol flow for the client requesting access, through an authorization server, to resources controlled by the resource owner and hosted by the resource server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For authorizing access to a protected resource, OAuth 2.0 uses Access Tokens. An access token is a piece of data representing an authorization issued to the client. It may also include scopes and durations of the access. The token is validated at the resource server. Briefly, the standard defines the roles of resource owner, resource server, client, and authorization server, and a protocol flow for the client requesting access, through an authorization server, to resources controlled by the resource owner and hosted by the resource server.
```

Reviewer: This sentence is bit hard to digest with all the commas

OpenID Connect provides authentication built on top of OAuth 2.0, and information about the authentication performed is returned in an ID Token with JWT format (JSON Web Token). In abstract, the protocol defines a client role or Relying Party that sends a request to the OpenID Provider, which in turn authenticates the end-user and obtains authorization, returning an ID Token and Access Token to the Relying Party.

## Authorization in a Spring Boot API

After the year 2020, in Buenos Aires, many bars and restaurants implemented a digital menu with a QR code that translates to a public document, for having an updated prices list. Prices change so often due to inflation, and updating a physical menu seems tedious and costly. Still, restaurant tables are managed with a software application, which includes a menu management module.

> For learning purposes, let's assume you have built a Spring Boot menu API that must be secured, so only authorized users can perform requests to its endpoints. Now you are going to implement authorization for the API with OAuth2 2.0 and Auth0. Start by doing a checkout of the API repository, which already implements basic request handling:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For learning purposes, let's assume you have built a Spring Boot menu API that must be secured, so only authorized users can perform requests to its endpoints. Now you are going to implement authorization for the API with OAuth 2.0 and Auth0. Start by doing a checkout of the API repository, which already implements basic request handling:
```

```shell
git clone https://github.com/indiepopart/spring-menu-api.git
```

The repository contains two project folders, `start` and `demo`. The bare bones menu API is a Gradle project in the `start` folder, open it with your favorite IDE. If you would rather skip the step-by-step security configuration and just run the final `demo` project, follow the instructions in the [README](https://github.com/indiepopart/spring-menu-api).

> Sign up at [Auth0](https://auth0.com/signup) and install the [Auth0 CLI](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli). Then in the command line run:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sign up at [Auth0](https://a0.to/blog_signup) and install the [Auth0 CLI](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli). Then in the command line run:
```

```shell
auth0 login
```

The command output will display a device confirmation code and open a browser session to activate the device.

> You don't need to create a client application for your API if not using opaque tokens. But you must register the API within your tenant, you can do it using Auth0 CLI:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You need to create a client application for your API if you are using opaque tokens. Since this tutorial does not use opaque tokens, you only need to register the API within your tenant. You can do it using Auth0 CLI:
```

```shell
auth0 apis create \
  --name "Menu API" \
  --identifier https://menu-api.okta.com \
  --scopes "create:items,update:items,delete:items" \
  --offline-access=false
```

> The scopes `create:items`, `update:items`, `delete:items` will be required ahead in the tutorial. Add the `okta-spring-boot-starter` dependency:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The scopes `create:items`, `update:items`, `delete:items` will be required ahead in the tutorial. 

Next, add the `okta-spring-boot-starter` dependency:
```

```groovy
// build.gradle
dependencies {
    ...
    implementation 'com.okta.spring:okta-spring-boot-starter:3.0.6'
    ...
}
```

> As the `menu-api` must be configured as an OAuth2 resource server, add the following properties:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As the `menu-api` must be configured as an OAuth2 resource server, add the following properties to the `application.properties` file:
```

```properties
# application.properties
okta.oauth2.issuer=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
okta.oauth2.audience=https://menu-api.okta.com
```

```shell

> auth0 tenants list

Reviewer: what is this command for? If its to get the issuer, please add some text with explanation

Author: Added text.

```

Run the API with:

```shell
./gradlew bootRun
```

Test the API authorization with curl:

```shell

> curl localhost:8080/api/menu/items

Reviewer: ```suggestion
curl -i localhost:8080/api/menu/items
```

```
You will get HTTP response code `401` because the request requires bearer authentication. Using Auth0 CLI, get an access token:

```shell
auth0 test token -a https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/ -s openid
```
Select any available client when prompted. You also will be prompted to open a browser window and log in with a user credential. You can sign up as a new user using an email and password or using the Google social login.

With curl, send a request to the API server using a bearer access token:

```shell

> ACCESS_TOKEN=<auth0-access-token>

Reviewer: both commands can be merged in one block

Author: Updated. Combined in one line.

```

```shell

> curl -v --header "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" localhost:8080/api/menu/items

Reviewer: ```suggestion
curl -i --header "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" localhost:8080/api/menu/items
```

```

> The request will not be authorized yet, because _This aud claim is not equal to the configured audience_. If the audience is not specified in the`auth0 test token` command, the default value is `https://dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com/api/v2`, which is the Auth0Provider management API audience.

Reviewer: This aud claim is ambiguous, can you clarify which aud claim you are referring to

Author: Added some clarification.

> The request will not be authorized yet, because _This aud claim is not equal to the configured audience_. If the audience is not specified in the`auth0 test token` command, the default value is `https://dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com/api/v2`, which is the Auth0Provider management API audience.

Reviewer: The default URL is tenant specific, so either make its general or say 'will be something like `https://dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com/api/v2`'

Author: Updated. Repalced by the palceholder.

> The request will not be authorized yet, because _This aud claim is not equal to the configured audience_. If the audience is not specified in the`auth0 test token` command, the default value is `https://dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com/api/v2`, which is the Auth0Provider management API audience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The request will not be authorized yet, because _This aud claim is not equal to the configured audience_. If the audience is not specified in the`auth0 test token` command, the default value is `https://dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com/api/v2`, which is the Auth0 Provider management API audience.
```

- Auth0 Domain: \<your-auth0-domain\>
- Auth0 Client ID: \<client-id\>
- Auth0 Callback URL: https://dashboard.whatabyte.app/home
- Auth0 API Audience: https://menu-api.okta.com

Click **Save**.

For the API server to accept requests from the WHATABYTE client, you must tweak the CORS configuration, enabling the WHATABYTE client URL as an allowed origin for requests.

In the API project under the `start` folder, add a `SecurityConfig` class at the root package:

```java
// src/main/java/com/example/menu/SecurityConfig.java
package com.example.menu;

@Configuration
public class SecurityConfig {

    @Bean
    public SecurityFilterChain configure(HttpSecurity http) throws Exception {
        return http
                .oauth2ResourceServer(oauth2ResourceServer -> oauth2ResourceServer.jwt(withDefaults()))
                .build();
    }

}
```

Modify `ItemController` by adding the `@CrossOrigin` annotation:

```java
// src/main/java/com/example/menu/web/ItemController.java
...

@RestController
@RequestMapping("/api/menu/items")
@CrossOrigin(origins = "https://dashboard.whatabyte.app")
public class ItemController {

...
```

> Restart the server API. Before the sign in, you can create some test users with the Auth0 CLI. This step is optional, you can sign up later from the [Auth0 Universal Login](https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/login/auth0-universal-login) form, or choose Google social login.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restart the API server. Before the sign in, you can create some test users with the Auth0 CLI. This step is optional, you can sign up later from the [Auth0 Universal Login](https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/login/auth0-universal-login) form, or choose Google social login.
```

{% img blog/spring-boot-authorization/whatabyte-ui.png alt:"WHATABYTE client" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

On the top right corner, click **Add Item**, and a pre-populated form will display. Click on **Save** and verify that the user request is authorized in the server.

## Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

If you disable the authentication features in the WHATABYTE client, it will allow you to attempt CRUD operations from the UI, but your API server will reject item modifications as an unauthenticated user.

{% img blog/spring-boot-authorization/whatabyte-unauth.png alt:"WHATABYTE client Unauthenticated" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Besides requiring a user to be authenticated, it is a standard practice to create roles for authorizing write operations.

### Create and assign roles

In the WHATABYTE client settings, re-enable the authentication features, and also enable RBAC. Set `menu-admin` in the _User Role_ text box. Click on **Save**.

Now if you sign in with the user you created, the UI will not display the links to perform write operations, as the role has not yet been assigned.

> First, the role must be defined in the Auth0 tenant as well. You can use the following Auth0 CLI command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, the `menu-admin` role must be defined in the Auth0 tenant as well. You can use the following Auth0 CLI command:
```

```shell
auth0 roles create
```

Assign the role to the user you created:

```shell
auth0 users roles assign
```

> NOTE: You can find the user id with `auth0 users search --query email:<email>`

Follow the steps, you will see the output below:

```text
=== dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com user roles (1)

  ID                    NAME           DESCRIPTION                                
  rol_Nf2xmon4GzTbLU9T  menu-admin     Admin role for menu item write operations  
```

### Mapping the roles to token claims

> The role `menu-admin` and its permissions must be mapped to a claim in the accessToken, to make them available in the API for authorization. With [Auth0 Actions](https://auth0.com/docs/customize/actions) you can customize the Login flow to map the user roles to a custom claim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The role `menu-admin` and its permissions must be mapped to a claim in the access token, to make them available in the API for authorization. With [Auth0 Actions](https://auth0.com/docs/customize/actions) you can customize the Login flow to map the user roles to a custom claim.
```

```groovy
// build.gradle
dependencies {
    ...
    implementation 'com.okta.spring:okta-spring-boot-starter:3.0.6'
    ...
}
```
As the `menu-api` must be configured as an OAuth2 resource server, add the following properties to the `application.properties` file:

```properties
# application.properties
okta.oauth2.issuer=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
okta.oauth2.audience=https://menu-api.okta.com
```

You can find your Auth0 domain with the following Auth0 CLI command:

```shell
auth0 tenants list
```

Run the API with:

```shell
./gradlew bootRun
```

Test the API authorization with curl:

```shell
curl -i localhost:8080/api/menu/items
```
You will get HTTP response code `401` because the request requires bearer authentication. Using Auth0 CLI, get an access token:

```shell
auth0 test token -a https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/ -s openid
```
Select any available client when prompted. You also will be prompted to open a browser window and log in with a user credential. You can sign up as a new user using an email and password or using the Google social login.

With curl, send a request to the API server using a bearer access token:

```shell

> ACCESS_TOKEN=<auth0-access-token> &&\

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ACCESS_TOKEN=<auth0-access-token>
```

>   curl -i --header "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" localhost:8080/api/menu/items

Reviewer: ```suggestion
curl -i --header "Authorization: Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN" localhost:8080/api/menu/items
```

---
layout: blog_post
title: "Add Security and Authorization to a Java Spring Boot API"
author: jimena-garbarino
by: contractor
communities: [security,java]
description: "Learn how to use Spring Boot, Java, and Auth0 to secure a feature-complete API, by implementing authorization in Spring Boot with Auth0."
tags: [java, security, oauth2, oidc]
tweets:
- ""
- ""
- ""
image:
type: awareness
---

Learn how to use Spring Boot, Java, and Auth0 to secure a feature-complete API, by implementing authorization in Spring Boot with Auth0.

> **This tutorial was created with the following tools and services**:
> - [Java OpenJDK 17](https://jdk.java.net/java-se-ri/17)
> - [Auth0 account](https://auth0.com/signup)

> > - [Auth0 CLI 1.0.0](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli#installation)

Reviewer: We should use the latest version 1.4.0?

Author: Updated

{% include toc.md %}

## Authentication and Authorization on the Web

> What is [authentication](https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-authentication)? It is the process of proving a user's identity, proving she is who she or he claims to be. And what is [authorization](https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-authorization)? It is the process of giving someone the ability to access a resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Authentication](https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-authentication) is the process of proving a user's identity, proving they are who they claim to be. [Authorization](https://auth0.com/intro-to-iam/what-is-authorization) is the process of giving someone the ability to access a resource.
```

> In computer systems, authentication and authorization are part of a discipline called Identity and Access Management (IAM). For web and mobile applications, an identity protocol was born in 2014, [OpenID Connect 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html), now widely adopted as part of the IAM strategy of many identity providers and identity clients on the internet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In computer systems, authentication and authorization are part of a discipline called Identity and Access Management (IAM). For web and mobile applications, an identity protocol was born in 2014, [OpenID Connect 1.0](https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html) (OIDC), now widely adopted as part of the IAM strategy of many identity providers and identity clients on the internet.
```

OpenID Connect 1.0 is a simple identity layer on top of [OAuth2 2.0](https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749.html), a preceding standard designed to authorize a website or application to access resources hosted by third-party services on behalf of a user.

> For authorizing access to a protected resource, OAuth 2.0 uses Access Tokens, a piece of data, a string representing an authorization issued to the client, scopes and durations of the access, validated at the resource server. Briefly, the standard defines the roles of resource owner, resource server, client, and authorization server, and a protocol flow for the client requesting access, through an authorization server, to resources controlled by the resource owner and hosted by the resource server.

Reviewer: Since the flow below starts with Authz followed by Authn, I think it would read better if OAuth2 is introduced first, followed by OIDC

Author: Updated

## Authorization in a Spring Boot API

After the year 2020, in Buenos Aires, many bars and restaurants implemented a digital menu with a QR code that translates to a public document, for having an updated prices list. Prices change so often due to inflation, and updating a physical menu seems tedious and costly. Still, restaurant tables are managed with a software application, which includes a menu management module.

For learning purposes, let's assume you have built a Spring Boot menu API that must be secured, so only authorized users can perform requests to its endpoints. Now you are going to implement authorization for the API with OAuth2 2.0 and Auth0. Start by doing a checkout of the API repository, which already implements basic request handling:

```shell
git clone https://github.com/indiepopart/spring-menu-api.git
```

> The bare bones menu API is a Gradle project in the `start` folder, open it with your favorite IDE.

Reviewer: Plz mention that the repo has two projects and specify the purpose of each and assign a name for each that will be used throughout the article (API and Dashboard for eg) so that its clearer later in the guide

Author: Added comment about the repo folders.

Sign up at [Auth0](https://auth0.com/signup) and install the [Auth0 CLI](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli). Then in the command line run:

```shell
auth0 login
```

The command output will display a device confirmation code and open a browser session to activate the device.

You don't need to create a client application for your API if not using opaque tokens. But you must register the API within your tenant, you can do it using Auth0 CLI:

```shell
auth0 apis create \
  --name "Menu API" \
  --identifier https://menu-api.okta.com \
  --scopes "create:items,update:items,delete:items" \

>   --token-lifetime 86400 \

Reviewer: 86400 is the default so I dont think we need to specify it

Author: Removed.

  --offline-access=false \

>   --signing-alg "RS256"

Reviewer: RS256 is the default so no need to specify it.

Author: Removed.

```

The scopes `create:items`, `update:items`, `delete:items` will be required ahead in the tutorial. Add the `okta-spring-boot-starter` dependency:

```groovy
// build.gradle
dependencies {
    ...
    implementation 'com.okta.spring:okta-spring-boot-starter:3.0.6'
    ...
}
```
As the `menu-api` must be configured as an OAuth2 resource server, add the following properties:

```properties
# application.properties
okta.oauth2.issuer=${OKTA_OAUTH2_ISSUER}
okta.oauth2.audience=${OKTA_OAUTH2_AUDIENCE}
```

> Create a `.env` file in the API root with the following content:

Reviewer: There are no secrets here, so I don't see the need for double routing, let's specify the values directly in application.properties

Author: Updated.

```shell
# .env
OKTA_OAUTH2_ISSUER=https://<your-auth0-domain>/
OKTA_OAUTH2_AUDIENCE=https://menu-api.okta.com
```

> At startup, these properties will be read using [spring-dotenv](https://github.com/paulschwarz/spring-dotenv), already included in the project dependencies. Set the value of `your-auth0-domain` to the active tenant returned by the command:

Reviewer: unnecessary unless we have secrets

Author: Removed from post.

```shell
auth0 tenants list
```

Run the API with:

```shell
./gradlew bootRun
```

> Test the API authorization with HTTPie:

Reviewer: Let's use curl instead of HTTPie, since more people use curl and are familiar with it. I ran a workshop recently and not even a single person used HTTPie

Author: Updated

```shell
http :8080/api/menu/items
```
You will get HTTP response code `401` because the request requires bearer authentication. Using Auth0 CLI, get an access token:

```shell
auth0 test token -a https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/ -s openid
```

> Select the **CLI Login Testing** client. You will also be prompted to open a browser window and log in with a user credential.

Reviewer: This client may not exist on a new tenant, so better to say select any available client or create a new one. For example `Select any available client when prompted. You also will be prompted to open a browser window and log in with a user credential. You can sign up as a new user using an email and password or using the Google social login.`

Author: Updated.

With HTTPie, send a request to the API server using a bearer access token:

```shell
ACCESS_TOKEN=<auth0-access-token>
```

```shell

> http :8080/api/menu/items Authorization:"Bearer $ACCESS_TOKEN"

Reviewer: curl plz

Author: Updated

> NOTE: The Okta Spring Boot Starter autoconfigures the issuer and audience validation from the resource server properties for JWT authorization.

Request a test token again, this time with the required audience:
```shell
auth0 test token -a https://<your-auth0-domain>/api/v2/ -s openid -a https://menu-api.okta.com
```
Try the API request again and you should get a JSON response listing the menu items:

```
[
    {
        "description": "Tasty",
        "id": 1,
        "imageUrl": "https://cdn.auth0.com/blog/whatabyte/burger-sm.png",
        "name": "Burger",
        "price": 599.0
    },
    {
        "description": "Cheesy",
        "id": 2,
        "imageUrl": "https://cdn.auth0.com/blog/whatabyte/pizza-sm.png",
        "name": "Pizza",
        "price": 299.0
    },
    {
        "description": "Informative",
        "id": 3,
        "imageUrl": "https://cdn.auth0.com/blog/whatabyte/tea-sm.png",
        "name": "Tea",
        "price": 199.0
    }
]
```

## Authentication from a Single-Page Application (SPA)

> It would be so much fun testing the API with a client application. Good fortune is on your side because you can use the [WHATABYTE Dashboard](https://dashboard.whatabyte.app/home), a live demo client where you can configure Auth0 authentication and send requests to your local API server.

Reviewer: Mention that this is the app in the demo folder

Reviewer: Are we gonna host this app in this URL forever? if not its better to run the app locally IMO

Author: The demo folder has also a resource server with the security dependencies and code already in place.

Author: I can't find the WHATABYTE client repository. Would you please help me?

Author: Updated for consistency.

For the Auth0 authentication, you need to register the live client as a Single-Page Application to Auth0. You can do it with the Auth0 CLI:

```shell
auth0 apps create \
  --name "WHATABYTE Demo Client" \
  --description "Single-Page Application Dashboard for menu items CRUD" \
  --type spa \
  --callbacks https://dashboard.whatabyte.app/home \
  --logout-urls https://dashboard.whatabyte.app/home \
  --origins https://dashboard.whatabyte.app \
  --web-origins https://dashboard.whatabyte.app
```

Go to the [WHATABYTE Dashboard](https://dashboard.whatabyte.app/home), and set _API Server Base URL_ to http://localhost:8080. Toggle on **Enable Authentication Features** and set the following values:

- Auth0 Domain: \<your-auth0-domain\>
- Auth0 Client ID: \<client-id\>
- Auth0 Callback URL: https://dashboard.whatabyte.app/home
- Auth0 API Audience: https://menu-api.okta.com

Click **Save**.

For the API server to accept requests from the dashboard, you must tweak the CORS configuration, enabling the dashboard URL as an allowed origin for requests.

> In the API project, add a `SecurityConfig` class at the root package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the API project under the `start` folder, add a `SecurityConfig` class at the root package:
```

        return http
                .oauth2ResourceServer(oauth2ResourceServer -> oauth2ResourceServer.jwt(withDefaults()))
                .build();
    }

}
```

Modify `ItemController` by adding the `@CrossOrigin` annotation:

```java
// src/main/java/com/example/menu/web/ItemController.java
...

@RestController
@RequestMapping("/api/menu/items")
@CrossOrigin(origins = "https://dashboard.whatabyte.app")
public class ItemController {

...
```

Restart the server API. Before the sign in, you can create some test users with the Auth0 CLI. This step is optional, you can sign up later from the [Auth0 Universal Login](https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/login/auth0-universal-login) form, or choose Google social login.

```shell
auth0 users create
```

Complete the required information, you will see an output like the lines below:

```text
Connection Name: Username-Password-Authentication
 Name: Thomas
 Email: thomas@email.com
 Password: ********

=== dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com user created

  ID          auth0|643ec0e1e671c7c9c5916ed6
  EMAIL       thomas@email.com
  CONNECTION  Username-Password-Authentication
```
Save the ID for later.

> In the dashboard, click the **Sign in** button. The client will redirect you to the [Auth0 Universal Login](https://auth0.com/docs/authenticate/login/auth0-universal-login) page. Sign in with the user you just created. In the left menu, choose **Menu**, and the menu items will display.

Reviewer: which dashboard? I guess demo, can we make it unambiguous plz?

Author: Updated for consistency.

{% img blog/spring-boot-authorization/whatabyte-ui.png alt:"WHATABYTE Dashboard" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

> On the top right corner, click **Add Item**, and a pre-populated form will display. Click on **Save** and verify the user request is authorized in the server.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the top right corner, click **Add Item**, and a pre-populated form will display. Click on **Save** and verify that the user request is authorized in the server.
```

## Role-Based Access Control (RBAC)

> If you disable the authentication features in the WHATABYTE client, it will allow you to attempt CRUD operations from the UI, but your API server will reject item modifications as an unauthenticated user.

Reviewer: I think this is the dashboard. can we use either dashboard or WHATABYTE client consistently to avoid confusion

Author: Updated

{% img blog/spring-boot-authorization/whatabyte-unauth.png alt:"WHATABYTE Dashboard Unauthenticated" width:"800" %}{: .center-image }

Besides requiring a user to be authenticated, it is a standard practice to create roles for authorizing write operations.

### Create and assign roles

> In the WHATABYTE client settings, re-enable the authentication features, and also enable RBAC. Set `menu-admin` in the _User Role_ text box. Click on **Save**.

Reviewer: Can we clear this up, what client is this [demo?](https://dashboard.whatabyte.app/home)?

Author: Updated for consistency.

Now if you sign in with the user you created, the UI will not display the links to perform write operations, as the role has not yet been assigned.

First, the role must be defined in the Auth0 tenant as well. You can use the following Auth0 CLI command:

```shell
auth0 roles create
```

Assign the role to the user you created:

```shell
auth0 users roles assign
```

> NOTE: You can find the user id with `auth0 users search --query email:<email>`

Follow the steps, you will see the output below:

```text
=== dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com user roles (1)

  ID                    NAME           DESCRIPTION                                
  rol_Nf2xmon4GzTbLU9T  menu-admin     Admin role for menu item write operations  
```

### Mapping the roles to token claims

The role `menu-admin` and its permissions must be mapped to a claim in the accessToken, to make them available in the API for authorization. With [Auth0 Actions](https://auth0.com/docs/customize/actions) you can customize the Login flow to map the user roles to a custom claim.

First [configure your preferred editor](https://github.com/auth0/auth0-cli#customization) to use with the Auth0 CLI:

```shell

> export EDITOR=nano

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# for example
export EDITOR=nano
```

```

Then create the Login Action:

```shell
auth0 actions create
```

Set the name __Add Roles__, and select **post-login** for the Trigger. When the editor opens, set the following implementation for the `onExecutePostLogin` function.

```javascript
exports.onExecutePostLogin = async (event, api) => {
  const namespace = 'https://menu-api.okta.com';
  if (event.authorization) {
    api.idToken.setCustomClaim('preferred_username', event.user.email);
    api.idToken.setCustomClaim(`${namespace}/roles`, event.authorization.roles);
    api.accessToken.setCustomClaim(`${namespace}/roles`, event.authorization.roles);
  }
}
```

Save the file. You should see the output below once the action is created.

> ```text

Reviewer: This long output seems unncessary, can we just say `You should see the output once the action is created`

Author: Removed.

                  * @param {PostLoginAPI} api - Interface whose methods can be used to change the behavior of the login.  
                  */                                                                                                      
                 // exports.onContinuePostLogin = async (event, api) => {                                                 
                 // };                                                                    
```

You can list the available actions with the following command:

```shell
auth0 actions list
```
The output will show the deployment status of each action:

```text
=== dev-avup2laz.us.auth0.com actions

  ID                                    NAME       TYPE        STATUS  DEPLOYED  
  da49ae42-b5e4-496a-8305-4fff437f813b  Add Roles  post-login  built   ✗         
```

Note the `DEPLOYED` status is `x`. Go ahead and deploy it using the action ID:

```shell
auth0 actions deploy \<ACTION_ID\>
```

Once the action is deployed, you must attach it to the login flow. You can do this with Auth0 [Management API for Actions](https://auth0.com/docs/api/management/v2#!/Actions/patch_bindings):

```shell

> auth0 api patch "actions/triggers/post-login/bindings" \

Reviewer: what does the `\` in `\<ACTION_ID\>` do? are they needed? looks a bit confusing

Author: Removed, escaping not needed.

```

You can visualize the flow in the Auth0 dashboard. Sign in and on the left menu you choose **Actions**, then in the **Flows** screen, choose **Login**.

{% img blog/spring-boot-authorization/login-flow.png alt:"Custom Auth0 Login Action" width:"600" %}{: .center-image }

Now the role has been assigned and mapped to the ID and access tokens, and the UI will display the links to perform write operations. Still, the API server is not yet enforcing RBAC.

### Enable RBAC in Auth0

The next step is to enable RBAC for the API in Auth0. You can do it with the following Auth0 CLI commands:

```shell
auth0 apis list
```

Copy the Menu API ID and use it for the next command:

```shell
auth0 api patch "resource-servers/API_ID" \
  --data '{ "enforce_policies": true, "token_dialect": "access_token_authz" }'
```

The `token_dialect` value `access_token_authz` enables the permissions to be included in the access token, in a custom `permissions` claim.

Assign the Menu API permissions to the `menu-admin` role:

```shell
auth0 roles permissions add
```

Follow the instructions, and make sure to select all the API permissions:
- `create:items`
- `delete:items`
- `update:items`

> Next, implement RBAC in the Spring Boot API.

Reviewer: plz clarify the folder path

Author: What folders?

### Implement RBAC in the Spring Boot API

The Okta Starter provides a simple way to specify the claim from which authorities must be extracted. In the `application.properties` file, add the following property:

```property
okta.oauth2.groupsClaim=permissions
```
With the `@PreAuthorize` annotation you define the required permission to perform the endpoint operation. The final controller implementation should look like this:

```java
// src/main/java/com/example/menu/web/ItemController.java

> package com.example.menu.web;

Reviewer: lets skip the imports since its in the git repo anyway, else this code block will look huge in the blog

Author: Imports removed.
